.. meta::
    :description: The new features, changes, and fixes in Canonical's Sphinx Starter Pack 1.6.


.. _release-1.6:

Canonical's Sphinx Starter Pack 1.6
===================================

24 March 2026

These release notes cover new features and changes in Canonical's Sphinx Starter Pack
1.6. The `full commit log
<https://github.com/canonical/sphinx-docs-starter-pack/releases/tag/1.6>`__ is available
on GitHub.

Bring these changes into your docs:

- :ref:`Update starter pack 1.3.0 and higher <update-new-starter-pack>`
- :ref:`Update starter pack 1.2.0 and lower <update-legacy-starter-pack>`


What's new in 1.6
-----------------


New extension for redirects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If your project has a lot of redirects, they can begin to clutter your build
configuration file. To remedy this, we changed the default extension for redirects to
sphinx-rerediraffe, a fork of sphinxext-rediraffe that supports external redirects and
cleans up destination URLs.

In your docs, you can now list redirects in a ``redirects.txt`` file and configure your
project to use them with:

.. code-block:: diff
    :caption: conf.py
    :class: no-copybutton

    - redirects = {
    -     "source-path": "destination-path"
    - }
    + rediraffe_redirects = "redirects.txt"
    + rediraffe_dir_only = True

If your project uses relative redirects, these should be rewritten relative to the
root of the docs directory.

For example, if you were previously redirecting ``/how-to/set-up/project/`` to
``../set-up-project/``, the redirect should now read:

.. code-block:: text
    :caption: redirects.txt
    :class: no-copybutton

    "/how-to/set-up/project/" "/how-to/set-up-project/"


Remote cookie banner files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Following the recent changes to the cookie banner, we evaluated how its files are
distributed and maintained. In version 1.6, these files are hosted centrally so you
don't need to duplicate them to enable Google Analytics for your project.

If you've already enabled Google Analytics in your project, you should make it a
priority to use the centrally-hosted files, as they contain important legal changes. For
guidance, refer to :ref:`how-to-enable-google-analytics`.


Virtual environment path
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To make the Python virtual environment more discoverable, we moved it from
``docs/.sphinx/venv`` to ``docs/.venv``. This also preserves the ``.sphinx/``
directory's scope, which is to house static utility files.

Once you've replaced all occurrences of the old path, remove the old virtual
environment.


Ulwazi testing guide
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Our new Sphinx theme based on the Vanilla framework, Ulwazi, is now available for
testing. To try it out, follow the new guide, :ref:`how-to-test-ulwazi-theme`.


Starter Pack explanation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We published :ref:`explanation-structure` to explain the functionality of and
relationships between the core elements of the Starter Pack.


Deprecated features
-------------------

The following features are deprecated and will be removed in an upcoming version of
the Starter Pack.


sphinx-reredirects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The sphinx-reredirects extension is deprecated in 1.6. Redirects, both internal and
external, should now be handled with sphinx-rerediraffe.


Fixed for 1.6
-------------

- `#535 <https://github.com/canonical/sphinx-docs-starter-pack/pull/535>`__ Markdown
  checks are incompatible with default runner version
- `#550 <https://github.com/canonical/sphinx-docs-starter-pack/issues/550>`__ Makefile
  doesn't allow for :vale-ignore:`pymarkdownlnt` to exit with a status code of 1


Contributors
------------

We would like to express a big thank you to all the people who contributed to this
release:

:literalref:`akcano <https://github.com/akcano>`,
:literalref:`AnneCYH <https://github.com/AnneCYH>`,
:literalref:`arturo-seijas <https://github.com/arturo-seijas>`,
:literalref:`jahn-junior <https://github.com/jahn-junior>`,
:literalref:`odadacharles <https://github.com/odadacharles>`,
:literalref:`wctaylor <https://github.com/wctaylor>`, and
:literalref:`yhontyk <https://github.com/yhontyk>`
